===== SOURCE: Medium =====
URL: https://medium.com/@rajrohan88293/under-the-hood-demystifying-pythons-internal-workings-4b2b17707516

MediumUnder the hood : Demystifying Python’s internal workings | by Rohan jha | MediumSitemapOpen in appSign upSign inMedium LogoGet appWriteSearchSign upSign inIntroductionTable of ContentsPython’s Architecture: The Big Picture1. Source Code: Human-Readable .py Files2. Compiler: Converts Python Code into Bytecode3. Interpreter: Executes the Bytecode Using the PVMDiagram: Python’s Layered ArchitectureKey Advantages of Python’s Layered Architecture: Explained1. Portability2. Caching3. Flexibility4. Ease of DebuggingUnderstanding Python Bytecode1. What is Python Bytecode?2. Misconception: Bytecode is Not Machine Code3. Platform-Dependent Nature of Bytecode4. How Bytecode Relates to .pyc Files5. Why Bytecode MattersThe Role of the Python Virtual Machine (PVM)1. What is the Python Virtual Machine (PVM)?2. Responsibilities of the PVM3. Implementation of the PVM in CPython4. How the PVM Enables Portability5. Python Virtual Machine in Other Implementations6. Why Understanding the PVM is ImportantMemory Management in Python1. Python’s Built-In Memory Management System2. Reference CountingHow Reference Counting WorksKey Points About Reference CountingLimitation of Reference Counting3. Garbage CollectionHow Garbage Collection WorksGenerational Garbage CollectionGarbage Collection Example4. Memory AllocatorKey Components of Python’s Memory AllocatorAdvantages of Python’s Memory AllocatorExample of Memory Allocation5. Impact on PerformancePerformance Tip:6. Visualization of Memory ManagementConclusionPython’s C Implementation (CPython): The Standard InterpreterWhat is CPython?CPython’s Architecture1. The Compiler2. Python Virtual Machine (PVM)How CPython Bridges Python Code with HardwareHow It Works:Key Advantages of CPython1. Widespread Adoption2. Performance3. Extensibility4. Cross-Platform CompatibilityLimitations of CPythonConclusionBeyond CPython: Alternative Python Implementations1. PyPy: A Faster Python Interpreter with JIT Compilation2. Jython: Python Running on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM)3. IronPython: Python for the .NET Framework4. MicroPython: Lightweight Python for MicrocontrollersPlatform Dependency of BytecodeUnderstanding Platform Dependency of Python BytecodeRole of .pyc Files and Their Importance in Program ExecutionWhy Sharing .pyc Files Across Platforms or Python Versions Can Lead to Compatibility IssuesBest Practices to Handle Platform and Version Dependency of .pyc FilesChallenges and Optimizations in PythonChallenges in PythonGlobal Interpreter Lock (GIL) and its Impact on Multi-ThreadingOptimizations in PythonPeephole OptimizationCaching of Modules and .pyc FilesBalancing Readability, Flexibility, and PerformanceReadability:Flexibility:Performance:Optimizations vs. Readability:ConclusionRohan jhaTalk about : Java | Golang | Cloud & DevOpsPythonData ScienceData AnalysisSqlPower BiUnder the hood : Demystifying Python’s internal workingsRohan jha29 min read·Jan 2, 2025--2ListenShareIntroductionHave you ever wondered what really happens when you type “python my_script.py” ? What goes on behind the scenes that transforms your neatly written code into something that a computer can execute ?Python is a high-level, interpreted programming language celebrated for its simplicity and readability. Designed with an emphasis on developer productivity, it abstracts away many of the complexities of low-level programming, allowing developers to focus on solving problems rather than managing intricate details of memory or system-level operations.Despite its simplicity, Python hides a complex mechanism under the hood. When you write and execute a Python script, a series of intricate processes unfold, from compiling your code into bytecode to executing it via the Python Virtual Machine (PVM).In this blog, we will begin on a journey to uncover these hidden workings. We’ll explore how python translates your code into a form it can understand, how it executes that code, and why bytecode, though not a machine code, plays a important role in python’s architecture. Along the way, we’ll also delve into python memory model, it’s runtime environment, and how different implementations like CPython, PYPY and others impact the execution process. By the end of this exploration, you’ll not only appreciate the beauty of Python’s design but also gain insights that can help you write better and more efficient Python code.Understanding Python’s internals is invaluable for several reasons :Debugging Complex Issues :When something goes wrong, a deeper understanding of Python’s internal mechanisms — like how the python virtual machine (PVM) executes bytecode or how memory management is handled — can help you trace and resolve tricky bugs. For example, knowing how python manages reference counting and garbage collection can help diagnose memory leaks or dangling references in your application.Performance Optimization:Writing efficient Python code requires knowledge of how Python handles variables, data structures, and function calls internally. By understanding concepts like the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL), the cost of certain operations in the PVM, or how Python optimizes bytecode, you can make informed decisions about algorithm design, use of multi-threading, or choosing the right libraries.Effective Debugging of Multi-Platform Issues:Knowledge of Python’s platform-dependent behavior, such as differences in .pyc bytecode or the impact of architecture-specific optimizations, can help troubleshoot issues that arise when running Python code across various operating systems or environments.Contributing to Python Development:For developers interested in contributing to Python itself or creating alternative implementations (like PyPy or MicroPython), understanding how Python processes source code, compiles it into bytecode, and executes it is essential. It’s the key to enhancing the language or fixing core-level bugs.Building Better Tools and Frameworks:Framework developers and tool creators often need to interact with Python’s internals, whether it’s extending functionality using C extensions, leveraging introspection, or interacting with Python’s runtime environment. A deeper understanding allows you to build more robust and efficient solutions.Writing Cleaner, Scalable Code:Awareness of Python’s internal memory management (like reference counting and garbage collection) helps write scalable code with fewer memory leaks. Similarly, understanding how Python handles imports or caches .pyc files ensures better modularity and efficiency in large projects.Ultimately, understanding the inner workings of Python empowers you to leverage the language to its fullest potential, making you not just a Python user, but a Python expert.Table of ContentsPython’s Architecture: The Big PictureThe Lifecycle of a Python ProgramUnderstanding Python BytecodeThe Role of the Python Virtual Machine (PVM)Memory Management in PythonPython’s C Implementation (CPython): The Standard InterpreterBeyond CPython: Alternative Python ImplementationsPlatform Dependency of BytecodeChallenges and Optimizations in PythonConclusionPython’s Architecture: The Big PicturePython’s architecture is a beautifully layered system that translates human-readable code into actionable instructions for the underlying hardware. This layered approach decouples the tasks of compilation and execution, making Python both flexible and powerful. Let’s break this down step-by-step:1. Source Code: Human-Readable .py FilesThis is where everything begins. Python source code is written in .py files using a high-level, human-readable syntax. For example:# simple.pydef greet(name): return f"Hello, {name}!"print(greet("Rohan"))The .py file is just plain text that Python cannot execute directly. It must first go through a series of transformations.2. Compiler: Converts Python Code into BytecodeWhen you run a Python script, the Python compiler steps in to convert your source code into bytecode, which is an intermediate, low-level representation of your program. Bytecode is a set of instructions that the Python Virtual Machine (PVM) can understand.How It Works:Lexical Analysis: The source code is broken into tokens (keywords, identifiers, operators, etc.).Parsing: These tokens are used to build an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST), representing the structure of the code.Compilation: The AST is then compiled into bytecode.This bytecode is stored in .pyc files (in the __pycache__ directory) for reuse, avoiding the need to recompile the code every time.Example of Bytecode (Disassembled):Here’s how Python compiles the greet function into bytecode:import disdef greet(name): return f"Hello, {name}!"dis.dis(greet)Output: 2 0 LOAD_CONST 1 ('Hello, ') 2 LOAD_FAST 0 (name) 4 FORMAT_VALUE 0 6 BUILD_STRING 2 8 RETURN_VALUEThis bytecode is not machine code but an intermediate representation that is platform-independent.3. Interpreter: Executes the Bytecode Using the PVMThe Python Virtual Machine (PVM) is the runtime engine responsible for executing the bytecode. It reads each bytecode instruction, one at a time, and executes the corresponding operations.The Decoupled Nature of PythonCompiler and Interpreter in Tandem:Python separates the process of compilation (source code → bytecode) from interpretation (bytecode → execution). This decoupling allows flexibility:The same bytecode can be reused across platforms (with platform-specific PVMs).Developers can modify the interpreter (e.g., replace CPython with PyPy) without affecting how the compiler works.Diagram: Python’s Layered Architecture+----------------------+| Source Code (.py) || (Human-Readable) |+----------------------+ ↓+----------------------+| Compiler || (Lexical Analysis, || Parsing, Bytecode || Generation) |+----------------------+ ↓+----------------------+| Bytecode || (.pyc in __pycache__)|| (Intermediate Form) |+----------------------+ ↓+----------------------+| Python Virtual || Machine (PVM) || (Interprets Bytecode)|+----------------------+ ↓+----------------------+| Underlying OS/Hardware |+----------------------+Key Advantages of Python’s Layered Architecture: ExplainedPython’s layered architecture offers several practical advantages, making it a robust and flexible language for development. Let’s break down each key advantage in detail:1. PortabilityThe bytecode generated by Python is platform-independent, meaning the same .py file can run seamlessly on multiple operating systems, such as Windows, macOS, or Linux. This portability is made possible by the Python Virtual Machine (PVM), which is tailored for each platform.How It Works:The Python compiler translates the source code into bytecode (stored in .pyc files), which is platform-neutral.Each platform has its own PVM that interprets the bytecode into native machine instructions.Example:A Python script written on Linux can be copied to a Windows system and executed without modification, as long as Python is installed on the target machine.Why It Matters:This eliminates the need for developers to rewrite code for different platforms, making Python a go-to choice for cross-platform applications.2. CachingPython automatically caches the compiled bytecode in .pyc files located in the __pycache__ directory. This caching mechanism improves performance by avoiding the need to recompile the source code every time the script is run.How It Works:When a .py file is executed for the first time, it is compiled into bytecode and saved as a .pyc file.On subsequent executions, Python checks the timestamp of the .py file. If it hasn’t changed, the cached .pyc file is used directly.Example:simple.py --> First run: Compiles to simple.cpython-39.pyc Subsequent runs: Uses cached simple.cpython-39.pycWhy It Matters:Caching speeds up script execution, especially for large applications where recompilation could be time-intensive.3. FlexibilityPython’s architecture allows developers to swap out the interpreter (e.g., CPython, Jython, PyPy) without rewriting the code. This flexibility opens up opportunities for optimization, experimentation, and running Python in diverse environments.Interpreter Options:CPython: The default Python interpreter, written in C.Jython: Allows Python code to run on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).PyPy: A Just-In-Time (JIT) compiler for Python, offering significant speed improvements.IronPython: Integrates Python with the .NET framework.Example Use Case:PyPy: Use PyPy to accelerate performance-critical Python applications.Jython: Use Jython to integrate Python code with existing Java libraries.Why It Matters:This modularity ensures Python can be adapted to various domains, from scientific computing to enterprise development.4. Ease of DebuggingThe layered design of Python’s architecture isolates each phase of execution (source code, compilation, interpretation), making it easier to pinpoint and resolve issues.Debugging Benefits:Compilation Errors: Errors in the source code (e.g., syntax errors) are caught during the compilation step, allowing quick corrections.Runtime Errors: If the bytecode execution fails, the error can be traced back to specific bytecode instructions, aiding diagnosis.Cross-Platform Bugs: Platform-dependent issues can be narrowed down to the PVM layer.Debugging Tools:dis Module: Analyze bytecode to understand execution details.pdb Debugger: Step through code execution at runtime.Example:Consider a segmentation fault occurring in a multi-threaded Python program. Knowledge of the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) and how the PVM handles threads helps diagnose and fix the problem.Why It Matters:This structured approach to error handling simplifies debugging, especially in complex applications or multi-platform deployments.Understanding Python BytecodePython bytecode plays a critical role in the execution of Python programs. It serves as an intermediate representation that bridges the gap between the high-level Python source code and the underlying hardware. Let’s explore bytecode in detail.1. What is Python Bytecode?Bytecode is a low-level set of instructions generated by the Python compiler from the source code. This bytecode is designed to be executed by the Python Virtual Machine (PVM).Bytecode is:Human-readable in a disassembled form (though not as intuitive as source code).Platform-neutral in its design but influenced by factors such as Python version and platform specifics.Example of Bytecode GenerationLet’s consider a simple Python script:# script.pydef add(a, b): return a + bresult = add(3, 5)print(result)When executed, Python compiles this code into bytecode, which can be disassembled using the dis module:import disdis.dis("def add(a, b): return a + b")Disassembled Bytecode:1 0 LOAD_FAST 0 (a) 2 LOAD_FAST 1 (b) 4 BINARY_ADD 6 RETURN_VALUEHere, LOAD_FAST, BINARY_ADD, and RETURN_VALUE are bytecode instructions.2. Misconception: Bytecode is Not Machine CodeOne common misunderstanding is that Python bytecode is equivalent to machine code. This is not true.Key differences :Aspect Bytecode Machine codeExecution Environment Executed by the PVM Executed directly by the CPUPlatform dependency Platform-neutral but Platform-specific interpreter specificPurpose Intermediate Final executable instructions representation for portabilityBytecode is an abstraction designed for portability, while machine code interacts directly with the hardware.PVM translates bytecode into platform-specific actions during runtime.3. Platform-Dependent Nature of BytecodeAlthough bytecode is designed to be platform-neutral, its generation can vary based on:Python Version: Each Python version may introduce new bytecode instructions or modify existing ones.Platform Architecture: Bytecode generated on a 32-bit system may differ from that on a 64-bit system.Why This Happens:The underlying PVM, which interprets bytecode, is platform-specific.Optimizations and configurations in the Python interpreter (e.g., CPython) can result in subtle differences.Example of Python Version DifferencesConsider this code snippet:x = 10y = x + 5When compiled with Python 3.7 and Python 3.11, the bytecode differs due to changes in the interpreter’s internal optimizations.Python 3.7 Bytecode:1 0 LOAD_CONST 1 (10) 2 STORE_NAME 0 (x) 4 LOAD_NAME 0 (x) 6 LOAD_CONST 2 (5) 8 BINARY_ADD 10 STORE_NAME 1 (y)Python 3.11 Bytecode (optimized):1 0 LOAD_CONST 1 (15) 2 STORE_NAME 1 (y)Here, Python 3.11 optimizes the addition (x + 5) at compile time.4. How Bytecode Relates to .pyc FilesWhen Python scripts are executed, the bytecode is often cached in .pyc files within the __pycache__ directory. This caching:Speeds up execution by reusing previously compiled bytecode.Simplifies debugging, as .pyc files can reveal compilation results.Example:After running script.py, the following .pyc file is generated:__pycache__/script.cpython-311.pycThe naming indicates:cpython: The Python interpreter used (CPython in this case).311: The Python version (3.11).5. Why Bytecode MattersUnderstanding bytecode is essential for:Debugging: Analyzing bytecode can help trace runtime errors or optimize code.Performance Optimization: Knowledge of bytecode instructions can inform better coding practices, reducing overhead.Interoperability: Writing compatible code across Python versions and platforms.Contributing to Python: Developers contributing to Python’s core (e.g., CPython) must understand bytecode intricacies.The Role of the Python Virtual Machine (PVM)The Python Virtual Machine (PVM) is the core execution engine of the Python programming language. Acting as an intermediary between the bytecode and the underlying hardware, it ensures that Python programs run smoothly and efficiently across different platforms. Let’s dive into the PVM’s structure and responsibilities to understand its role in Python’s execution model.1. What is the Python Virtual Machine (PVM)?The PVM is a stack-based virtual machine responsible for interpreting and executing Python’s bytecode.Key Characteristics of the PVM:It is an abstract computational model, implemented in C (in CPython).The PVM reads and executes bytecode instructions generated by the Python compiler.Unlike physical hardware, the PVM is a software-based execution engine, providing a layer of abstraction for Python programs.In simpler terms, the PVM bridges the gap between the high-level Python code and the underlying system resources.2. Responsibilities of the PVMa. Reading Bytecode InstructionsThe PVM begins execution by reading bytecode instructions stored in .pyc files or in memory.For example, consider the following Python function:def add(a, b): return a + bresult = add(3, 5)When compiled into bytecode, this function might look like:0 LOAD_FAST 0 (a) 2 LOAD_FAST 1 (b) 4 BINARY_ADD 6 RETURN_VALUEThe PVM reads these instructions sequentially, translating them into corresponding operations in the runtime environment.b. Executing Bytecode InstructionsThe PVM executes each bytecode instruction by mapping it to predefined C functions in the CPython interpreter.For instance:The LOAD_FAST instruction retrieves a local variable from the stack.The BINARY_ADD instruction performs an addition operation.The RETURN_VALUE instruction returns a result to the caller.Each bytecode operation corresponds to a handler function written in C within CPython’s core. This design enables the PVM to efficiently execute Python code.c. Stack-Based Execution ModelThe PVM operates on a stack-based architecture, where operands (e.g., variables or literals) are pushed onto a stack, and operations (e.g., addition, multiplication) pop values from the stack, perform the operation, and push the result back.This stack-based design simplifies instruction decoding and execution.Example: Stack-Based ExecutionConsider this Python statement:result = (3 + 5) * 2Bytecode Instructions:0 LOAD_CONST 1 (3)2 LOAD_CONST 2 (5)4 BINARY_ADD6 LOAD_CONST 3 (2)8 BINARY_MULTIPLY10 STORE_NAME 0 (result)2. Stack Operations:LOAD_CONST (3): Push 3 onto the stack.LOAD_CONST (5): Push 5 onto the stack.BINARY_ADD: Pop 3 and 5, add them, and push the result (8) onto the stack.LOAD_CONST (2): Push 2 onto the stack.BINARY_MULTIPLY: Pop 8 and 2, multiply them, and push the result (16) onto the stack.STORE_NAME: Assign the result (16) to the variable result.d. Memory and Resource ManagementThe PVM handles:Garbage Collection: Automatically manages memory by freeing up unused objects.This is done using reference counting and cyclic garbage collection.Exception Handling: The PVM executes exception-handling blocks (try...except) when errors occur.3. Implementation of the PVM in CPythonIn CPython, the PVM is implemented as a loop that fetches, decodes, and executes bytecode instructions.Here’s a simplified representation of the main execution loop:while (1) { instruction = fetch_next_bytecode(); // Fetch the next instruction execute_instruction(instruction); // Map to the appropriate C function}Each bytecode instruction is mapped to a corresponding opcode handler in CPython, which is written in C. For example:LOAD_CONST: Fetches a constant and pushes it onto the stack.BINARY_ADD: Pops two operands, adds them, and pushes the result.4. How the PVM Enables PortabilityThe PVM plays a critical role in Python’s portability. Since the PVM abstracts away platform-specific details, Python programs can run on any platform with a compatible interpreter.Example: The same Python bytecode can run on Linux, Windows, or macOS, provided a PVM implementation (like CPython) is available for the platform.5. Python Virtual Machine in Other ImplementationsWhile CPython is the most common implementation of Python, other Python interpreters implement their versions of the PVM:PyPy: A Just-In-Time (JIT) compiled version of Python with an optimized PVM.Jython: Runs Python on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).IronPython: Executes Python on the .NET framework.Each of these interpreters provides its implementation of the PVM while adhering to the fundamental principles of Python execution.6. Why Understanding the PVM is ImportantA deep understanding of the PVM helps developers:Debug More Effectively: Knowing how bytecode is executed can help trace errors more precisely.Optimize Code: Avoid unnecessary stack operations or performance bottlenecks.Contribute to Python: Core developers working on CPython need a thorough knowledge of the PVM.Understand Cross-Platform Behavior: Recognize how the PVM ensures compatibility across platforms.Memory Management in PythonMemory management is a critical component of Python’s runtime environment, ensuring efficient allocation, use, and release of memory during the execution of a program. Python’s memory management system is designed to abstract away low-level memory handling, allowing developers to focus on writing code without worrying about manual memory allocation and deallocation. Let’s explore the mechanisms Python uses to manage memory.1. Python’s Built-In Memory Management SystemPython has a highly optimized and automated memory management system. It includes three main components:Reference Counting: The primary mechanism for tracking and managing memory.Garbage Collection: A complementary system for cleaning up circular references.Memory Allocator: A system that optimizes memory allocation and reuses memory blocks for improved performance.2. Reference CountingHow Reference Counting WorksEvery Python object has an associated reference count that tracks how many references point to that object. The reference count is incremented or decremented as references are created or destroyed.When an object’s reference count drops to zero, it means the object is no longer accessible, and its memory can be safely reclaimed.Example of Reference Counting:# Creating an objecta = [1, 2, 3] # Reference count for the list is now 1b = a # Reference count increases to 2del a # Reference count decreases to 1del b # Reference count decreases to 0 (object is deallocated)Key Points About Reference CountingAutomatic Memory Management: Reference counting automatically reclaims memory when an object is no longer needed.Simple and Fast: It operates in constant time, making it efficient for managing most objects.Limitation of Reference CountingCircular References: Reference counting alone cannot handle circular references, where objects reference each other but are otherwise unreachable.Example of a Circular Reference:class Node: def __init__(self, value): self.value = value self.next = None# Create circular referencesnode1 = Node(1)node2 = Node(2)node1.next = node2node2.next = node1# Even after deleting references, memory is not freeddel node1del node23. Garbage CollectionTo address the limitations of reference counting, Python uses a cyclic garbage collector that detects and cleans up circular references.How Garbage Collection WorksTracking Objects: Python’s garbage collector keeps track of all objects allocated in memory.Cycle Detection: Periodically, it scans for objects with circular references.Reclamation: If objects in a cycle are unreachable from the rest of the program, their memory is reclaimed.Generational Garbage CollectionPython organizes objects into three generations:Generation 0: Newly created objects.Generation 1: Objects that survived one garbage collection cycle.Generation 2: Long-lived objects that survived multiple cycles.Garbage collection occurs more frequently in Generation 0 than in Generation 2, optimizing performance by focusing on short-lived objects.Garbage Collection Exampleimport gc# Enable debugging outputgc.set_debug(gc.DEBUG_LEAK)# Create circular referencesa = []b = [a]a.append(b)# Remove referencesdel adel b# Force garbage collectiongc.collect()4. Memory AllocatorPython uses a specialized memory allocator to manage memory more efficiently than relying directly on the operating system.Key Components of Python’s Memory AllocatorPyObject Allocator: Manages memory for Python objects.Block Allocator: Handles small memory requests (<= 512 bytes) by grouping them into blocks.Arena Allocator: Allocates large chunks of memory (arenas) and divides them into smaller blocks.Advantages of Python’s Memory AllocatorPerformance Optimization: Reuses memory blocks to reduce allocation overhead.Reduced Fragmentation: Prevents memory fragmentation by managing memory at a higher level.Example of Memory Allocationimport sys# Memory usage of objectsx = []print(sys.getsizeof(x)) # Memory allocated for an empty listx.append(1)print(sys.getsizeof(x)) # Memory allocated after adding an element5. Impact on PerformanceEfficient memory management significantly impacts Python’s performance.Reference Counting: Ensures minimal delay in reclaiming memory for short-lived objects.Garbage Collection: Cleans up memory leaks caused by circular references, preventing programs from exhausting available memory.Memory Allocator: Reduces system calls for memory allocation, optimizing memory reuse and speed.Performance Tip:Excessive garbage collection can slow down programs. Use gc.disable() to turn off the garbage collector if your program doesn’t create circular references, or manually control it using gc.collect().6. Visualization of Memory ManagementBelow is a conceptual diagram of Python’s memory management system:+-----------------------------+| Python Program |+-----------------------------+ | V+-----------------------------+| Reference Counting |+-----------------------------+ | V+-----------------------------+| Cyclic Garbage Collector |+-----------------------------+ | V+-----------------------------+| Memory Allocator |+-----------------------------+ | V+-----------------------------+| Operating System Memory Pool |+-----------------------------+ConclusionPython’s memory management system is a sophisticated combination of reference counting, garbage collection, and a custom memory allocator. While developers can largely rely on Python’s automated memory management, understanding its internals is crucial for:Debugging memory leaks.Optimizing performance.Writing memory-efficient programs.By leveraging Python’s memory management effectively, developers can write robust and efficient code that scales well with complexity.Python’s C Implementation (CPython): The Standard InterpreterCPython is the default and most widely used implementation of the Python programming language. Its name reflects its origins: it is implemented in the C programming language. CPython’s design balances simplicity, readability, and performance, making it the foundation of Python’s success.What is CPython?CPython is the reference implementation of Python.It is an interpreted language, meaning that Python code is executed line-by-line rather than being pre-compiled into machine code.Why C? Python was designed to be a high-level, beginner-friendly language. Implementing it in C leverages C’s performance and direct access to system resources while abstracting complexity for developers.CPython’s ArchitectureCPython is designed around two main components:Compiler: Converts Python code into bytecode.Python Virtual Machine (PVM): Executes the bytecode on the underlying system.Let’s break this architecture into details:1. The CompilerThe CPython compiler is responsible for parsing and translating Python source code into bytecode, which is an intermediate, platform-independent representation.Steps in the Compilation Process:Lexical Analysis: The source code is broken into tokens (e.g., keywords, identifiers, operators).Parsing: A parse tree (or abstract syntax tree, AST) is generated based on the structure of the tokens.Code Generation: The AST is transformed into bytecode, a sequence of instructions understandable by the PVM.Code Example: Compilation Process# Simple Python codea = 2 + 3Resulting Bytecode (using the dis module):import disdef sample_function(): a = 2 + 3dis.dis(sample_function)Output:2 0 LOAD_CONST 1 (2) 2 LOAD_CONST 2 (3) 4 BINARY_ADD 6 STORE_FAST 0 (a) 8 RETURN_VALUEThis bytecode is stored in .pyc files, enabling reuse without recompiling the source code.2. Python Virtual Machine (PVM)The PVM is the execution engine of Python. It takes the generated bytecode and runs it. In CPython, the PVM is implemented in C for high performance and optimized execution.The PVM is stack-based, meaning it uses a stack to store intermediate values during execution.Bytecode instructions are mapped to C functions in CPython, which are executed one by one.How CPython Bridges Python Code with HardwareCPython acts as an intermediary between high-level Python code and low-level hardware instructions. This design allows developers to write cross-platform code without worrying about platform-specific details.How It Works:Python Source Code → Human-readable instructions.CPython Compiler → Converts source code into bytecode, independent of the platform.PVM → Executes bytecode using platform-specific system calls and libraries.Diagram of CPython Workflow:+-------------------------+| Python Source Code (.py)|+-------------------------+ | V+-------------------------+| CPython Compiler || (Converts to Bytecode) |+-------------------------+ | V+-------------------------+| Python Virtual Machine || (Executes Bytecode) |+-------------------------+ | V+-------------------------+| Operating System/Hardware|+-------------------------+Key Advantages of CPython1. Widespread AdoptionCPython is the de facto standard Python implementation, used by most developers and projects worldwide. Its stability and robust ecosystem make it the first choice for many.2. PerformanceWhile not as fast as compiled languages like C or C++, CPython provides excellent performance for most use cases, especially when combined with extensions written in C.3. ExtensibilitySince CPython is written in C, developers can:Write C extensions to speed up performance-critical parts of the code.Integrate with existing C libraries for specialized functionality.4. Cross-Platform CompatibilityCPython abstracts platform-specific details, allowing developers to write code that runs seamlessly on Windows, macOS, Linux, and other platforms.Limitations of CPythonDespite its strengths, CPython has a few limitations:Global Interpreter Lock (GIL):The GIL restricts execution of Python threads to one at a time, limiting parallelism in multi-threaded programs.Not a Just-In-Time (JIT) Compiler:CPython executes bytecode directly without compiling it to machine code, which can make it slower than JIT-compiled implementations like PyPy.Memory Management Overhead:CPython’s garbage collection can sometimes cause performance bottlenecks, especially in applications with a high volume of object creation and deletion.ConclusionCPython’s architecture demonstrates the power of combining simplicity, flexibility, and performance in an interpreter design. Its layered approach, with a compiler and a virtual machine, allows Python to run on diverse platforms while providing a high-level abstraction for developers.By understanding CPython, developers can:Optimize performance-critical code by leveraging C extensions.Debug and profile Python programs more effectively.Contribute to Python’s core development or build alternative implementations (e.g., PyPy or Jython).CPython remains the backbone of Python’s ecosystem, powering millions of applications and enabling developers to focus on solving problems rather than managing system-level complexities.Beyond CPython: Alternative Python ImplementationsWhile CPython is the reference implementation of Python, it’s not the only one. Several alternative Python implementations exist, each tailored to specific use cases and platforms. These implementations expand Python’s versatility and allow developers to leverage Python in diverse environments such as Java, .NET, and embedded systems.1. PyPy: A Faster Python Interpreter with JIT CompilationOverview:PyPy is an alternative Python interpreter designed for speed and efficiency. It achieves this through Just-In-Time (JIT) compilation, which compiles Python code into machine code during runtime, significantly improving execution speed.Key Features:JIT Compilation: Unlike CPython, which interprets bytecode directly, PyPy compiles frequently used code paths into machine code for faster execution.Memory Efficiency: PyPy uses a garbage collector optimized for reducing memory usage in long-running applications.Compatibility: PyPy supports most Python libraries and features but occasionally has compatibility issues with C extensions written for CPython.How It Differs from CPython:Bytecode Generation: PyPy generates its own bytecode but optimizes execution by translating hot code paths into machine code at runtime.Execution Speed: Benchmarks often show PyPy outperforming CPython, especially for CPU-intensive tasks.When to Use PyPy:PyPy is ideal for applications where performance is critical, such as scientific computing, machine learning, or high-performance web servers.2. Jython: Python Running on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM)Overview:Jython is an implementation of Python that runs on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). It enables Python code to interoperate seamlessly with Java, making it a powerful choice for developers working in mixed Python and Java environments.Key Features:Integration with Java: Python code can directly call Java libraries and classes.Platform Independence: Leverages the JVM’s cross-platform capabilities.Dynamic Compilation: Jython compiles Python code into Java bytecode, which is executed by the JVM.How It Differs from CPython:Bytecode Generation: Jython compiles Python code into Java bytecode, not Python bytecode.Execution Environment: Jython relies on the JVM for execution, enabling it to use Java’s robust ecosystem of tools and libraries.No C Extensions: Jython does not support CPython’s C extensions because it is designed for the JVM.When to Use Jython:Jython is best suited for projects requiring tight integration with Java or deployment in Java-heavy environments, such as enterprise applications or Android development.3. IronPython: Python for the .NET FrameworkOverview:IronPython is an implementation of Python that runs on the .NET framework. It allows Python to seamlessly integrate with .NET libraries, enabling Python code to interact with C# and VB.NET.Key Features:.NET Integration: Full interoperability with .NET assemblies, libraries, and tools.Dynamic Language Runtime (DLR): Utilizes the .NET DLR for dynamic typing and execution.Cross-Language Support: Python code can be embedded in .NET applications or used to script .NET environments.How It Differs from CPython:Bytecode Generation: IronPython compiles Python code into .NET bytecode, which is executed by the Common Language Runtime (CLR).Execution Environment: Runs entirely within the .NET ecosystem, making it ideal for Windows-based applications.No C Extensions: Like Jython, IronPython does not support CPython’s C extensions.When to Use IronPython:IronPython is a great choice for .NET developers looking to add Python scripting to their applications or for Python developers integrating with Windows-specific technologies like WPF or UWP.4. MicroPython: Lightweight Python for MicrocontrollersOverview:MicroPython is a lightweight implementation of Python designed for microcontrollers and embedded systems. It brings Python’s simplicity to constrained environments, enabling rapid prototyping for IoT devices.Key Features:Small Footprint: Designed to run on microcontrollers with as little as 256KB of flash memory.Hardware Access: Directly interacts with hardware peripherals (e.g., GPIO, I2C, SPI).Subset of Python: Implements a subset of Python 3, removing less critical features to fit within memory constraints.How It Differs from CPython:Bytecode Generation: MicroPython compiles Python code into a stripped-down version of Python bytecode.Execution Environment: Executes directly on hardware without the need for an operating system.Performance Trade-Offs: Optimized for low-resource environments rather than speed or full compatibility with standard Python libraries.When to Use MicroPython:MicroPython is ideal for embedded systems, robotics, and IoT applications where resources are limited but rapid development is essential.Platform Dependency of BytecodeIn Python, bytecode is a platform-independent intermediate representation of the source code. While Python strives to be cross-platform, the bytecode generated from the source code is not truly universal across all platforms and Python versions. Let’s dive deeper into the platform-specific nature of Python bytecode, the role of .pyc files, and why sharing these files between platforms or Python versions can result in compatibility issues.Understanding Platform Dependency of Python BytecodeBytecode, as we’ve discussed earlier, is an intermediate representation of Python source code. It’s produced when the Python interpreter compiles a .py file (Python source code) and saves the compiled code as .pyc files. These files are then executed by the Python Virtual Machine (PVM).However, despite Python’s platform independence at the source code level, bytecode is not inherently platform-agnostic. This is because the bytecode is designed to be processed by a platform-specific PVM (Python Virtual Machine). The Python interpreter for each platform (e.g., Windows, Linux, macOS) or architecture (e.g., x86, ARM) produces different bytecode optimized for that specific system.Key reasons for platform dependency in bytecode:CPU Architecture: Different platforms may have different CPU architectures, such as 32-bit versus 64-bit, or even different instruction sets (e.g., x86 vs ARM), which influence how bytecode is structured.Python Version Differences: As Python evolves, changes are made to the way bytecode is generated. The bytecode format may change between Python versions (e.g., 2.x vs 3.x), meaning bytecode generated by one version may not be compatible with another.Libraries and Dependencies: External libraries or platform-specific dependencies may also affect bytecode execution. A .pyc file compiled with certain library versions or configurations might not run correctly on other platforms where those libraries or versions are unavailable.Role of .pyc Files and Their Importance in Program ExecutionWhen a Python file is imported, the interpreter compiles it into bytecode. This bytecode is then stored in .pyc files within the __pycache__ directory..pyc files are compiled versions of Python source code files, and their primary function is to optimize the execution of Python programs. When a Python program is executed for the first time, the interpreter reads the source code, converts it to bytecode, and stores this bytecode in .pyc files. On subsequent executions, the Python interpreter can directly load the bytecode from these .pyc files, skipping the compilation step.Key Benefits of .pyc Files:Faster Execution: By saving compiled bytecode in .pyc files, Python avoids recompiling the source code every time the program is run. This reduces the startup time for programs, especially large ones.Platform-Independent Distribution: You can distribute .pyc files instead of .py files, which can be executed more quickly on the target system without needing to compile the source code every time.Caching: Python caches .pyc files based on the file's timestamp, so if the source code changes, the .pyc file is recompiled. This caching mechanism ensures that the program always uses the most up-to-date bytecode.Why Sharing .pyc Files Across Platforms or Python Versions Can Lead to Compatibility IssuesAlthough .pyc files provide significant performance benefits, they are platform- and version-dependent. This means that sharing .pyc files between different platforms or different Python versions often causes compatibility issues.Different Bytecode Formats for Different Platforms:As mentioned earlier, bytecode is compiled based on the platform’s architecture. A .pyc file generated on a 32-bit system might not be compatible with a 64-bit system because of differences in how memory addresses or data structures are handled.For example, a .pyc file generated on a Windows machine might not work on Linux, even if both systems are running the same version of Python, because the bytecode is compiled differently for each operating system.Python Version Mismatch:Python bytecode format changes between major versions (e.g., Python 2 to Python 3). Even within Python 3, the bytecode format can change from one minor version to another. This makes .pyc files from one version of Python incompatible with another version.For instance, .pyc files generated in Python 3.7 might not work in Python 3.8 because the bytecode format might differ. Python typically adds a version tag to the .pyc files to indicate the Python version they were compiled with, preventing the interpreter from loading incompatible files.Incompatible C Extensions:Many Python libraries rely on C extensions to provide optimized performance. These extensions are compiled specifically for the underlying platform and architecture. A .pyc file containing calls to such extensions may not run correctly if the C extensions are not compatible with the target platform or Python version.Incorrect Caching Behavior:Python caches .pyc files based on the timestamp of the corresponding .py file. However, if the .pyc file was compiled on a different platform or Python version, the timestamp may not accurately reflect whether the bytecode is still valid.This can result in outdated or incorrect bytecode being used when the .pyc file is transferred across platforms or versions.Best Practices to Handle Platform and Version Dependency of .pyc FilesTo avoid issues related to bytecode compatibility, here are a few best practices:Distribute Source Code, Not .pyc Files:When sharing Python code across different platforms or versions, it’s best to distribute the source .py files rather than .pyc files. The recipient can then compile the bytecode themselves, ensuring it’s tailored for their specific platform and Python version.Use Virtual Environments:Using virtual environments allows developers to manage dependencies and Python versions for different projects. By isolating dependencies and creating project-specific environments, you can avoid conflicts between Python versions and ensure consistency in bytecode generation.Check Compatibility Before Sharing .pyc Files:If you must share .pyc files, ensure they are generated with the target platform and Python version in mind. You can use the -B flag to prevent Python from generating .pyc files, or you can clean the __pycache__ folder before sharing code.Recompile .pyc Files on Each Platform:If distributing .pyc files is necessary, it’s best to generate and distribute them separately for each platform and Python version. This avoids the compatibility issues that arise from sharing .pyc files between systems with different architectures.Challenges and Optimizations in PythonWhile Python’s design has garnered it widespread popularity due to its simplicity, readability, and flexibility, these advantages come with certain challenges — especially in areas related to performance and concurrency. Python, like any language, faces trade-offs between its features and execution efficiency. In this section, we’ll discuss some of the primary challenges, including the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL), and explore key optimizations used to improve Python’s performance, such as peephole optimization and caching.Challenges in PythonGlobal Interpreter Lock (GIL) and its Impact on Multi-ThreadingThe Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) is a major design feature of CPython (the most commonly used Python interpreter). It ensures that only one thread can execute Python bytecode at a time, even on multi-core processors. This design decision was originally made to simplify memory management and make CPython safer in a multi-threaded environment.However, the GIL presents challenges in multi-threading, particularly in CPU-bound tasks, where multiple threads attempt to perform intensive computations.Implications of the GIL:Single-threaded Execution: Even if Python programs are written to use multiple threads, only one thread can execute Python code at any given time. While this allows threads to share data and perform I/O operations concurrently, it significantly limits the benefits of multi-core processors for CPU-bound tasks.Blocking Behavior: In CPU-intensive tasks (e.g., numerical computations, machine learning), the GIL can become a bottleneck, as the interpreter’s execution is locked for each thread, preventing true parallelism.Workarounds for GIL Limitations:Multi-Processing: Python’s multiprocessing module allows the creation of separate processes, which bypasses the GIL limitation. Each process has its own memory space and GIL, making it ideal for CPU-bound tasks that need true parallelism.Extensions and Libraries: Some libraries (e.g., NumPy, SciPy) are written in C or C++ and can release the GIL when performing computation-heavy tasks, allowing for multi-threading in those cases.Alternative Python Implementations: Other Python implementations, like Jython and IronPython, do not have a GIL, allowing full multi-threading support. However, they come with their own trade-offs, such as reduced compatibility with Python libraries that rely on CPython’s specific features.Optimizations in PythonDespite these challenges, Python includes several optimizations that balance its ease of use with improved performance. Here are a few key optimizations:Peephole OptimizationPeephole optimization is a simple, yet effective, technique used by Python’s compiler to optimize bytecode during the compilation phase. It focuses on small improvements at the bytecode level by recognizing and simplifying common patterns in the generated code.How it works:Simplification of Instructions: Peephole optimizations look at the recently generated instructions (in a “peephole” window) and attempt to combine or eliminate redundant instructions.Example: A common peephole optimization is to combine two consecutive LOAD_CONST operations into one. If a constant is loaded multiple times without being modified, the interpreter can reduce the number of instructions needed by eliminating unnecessary ones.Benefits:Faster Execution: Peephole optimizations simplify bytecode, reducing the number of instructions executed by the Python Virtual Machine (PVM), which can result in performance improvements.Smaller Bytecode: The optimized bytecode is more compact, meaning it requires less memory to execute.Caching of Modules and .pyc FilesPython’s caching mechanism helps improve performance by ensuring that modules are not recompiled every time the program is run. When Python imports a module, it compiles the module’s .py file into bytecode and saves it as a .pyc file in the __pycache__ directory. This bytecode can be loaded directly from the .pyc file during subsequent program executions, bypassing the compilation step and saving time.How caching improves performance:Faster Imports: The compilation of a Python module into bytecode can be an expensive operation, especially for larger modules or when the module is imported multiple times. Caching the .pyc files makes subsequent imports much faster, as the bytecode is already available.Timestamp-Based Caching: The .pyc files are cached based on the timestamp of the source .py file. If the source code hasn’t changed, Python will load the cached .pyc file directly. If the source code has changed, the .pyc file will be recompiled.This caching mechanism speeds up the development process and improves performance, especially in large codebases.Balancing Readability, Flexibility, and PerformanceOne of the key reasons Python has become so popular is its ability to strike a balance between readability, flexibility, and performance. However, each of these characteristics comes with trade-offs.Readability:Python emphasizes readability through clean and easy-to-understand syntax. This makes it an ideal choice for beginners and for projects where maintainability and collaboration are key.The indentation-based syntax and simple constructs (e.g., list comprehensions) enhance readability, but can sometimes sacrifice raw performance due to a higher level of abstraction compared to more low-level languages like C or C++.Flexibility:Python’s dynamic typing and ability to rapidly prototype code make it incredibly flexible. It supports multiple programming paradigms, including procedural, object-oriented, and functional programming.This flexibility, however, can come at the cost of performance, as certain dynamic features (like duck typing and reflection) add overhead compared to statically typed languages.Performance:Interpreted Nature: As an interpreted language, Python is slower than compiled languages because the source code is translated to bytecode and executed at runtime. While optimizations like peephole optimization and caching help mitigate some of these issues, Python still lags behind statically typed, compiled languages in terms of execution speed.External Libraries: Python’s performance can be significantly improved by using C extensions or libraries like NumPy and Cython, which provide optimized implementations of common operations in Python. These allow critical parts of a program to be written in a low-level language for speed, while the rest of the program remains written in Python for ease of development.Optimizations vs. Readability:Some optimizations, such as just-in-time compilation (JIT) in alternative Python implementations like PyPy, can improve performance at the expense of extra complexity and reduced transparency. While JIT compilers can significantly speed up Python code execution, they add another layer of complexity that can make the code harder to debug and understand.CPython’s optimizations (like caching and peephole optimizations) are designed to make Python faster without sacrificing too much readability. However, for highly performance-sensitive applications, developers might need to resort to using a hybrid approach — where Python is used for the high-level structure and performance-critical components are implemented in a lower-level language.ConclusionWe’ve come full circle in our exploration of Python’s internal workings, from the human-readable source code to the execution of instructions via the Python Virtual Machine (PVM). Along the way, we uncovered the layers of the language’s architecture, including the compiler, which translates Python code into bytecode, and the interpreter, which executes this bytecode. We also touched on the intricacies of memory management, the role of CPython as the standard interpreter, and even alternative Python implementations like PyPy and Jython.Understanding these internals isn’t just an academic exercise — it’s a powerful tool in your developer’s toolkit. Whether you’re debugging complex issues, optimizing performance for a specific use case, or even looking to contribute to Python’s core development, having an understanding of how Python works beneath the surface can help you make more informed decisions. Python is more than just a language; it’s an ecosystem. Knowing how it works can make you a more effective developer, capable of navigating its complexities with greater ease and understanding.So, as we conclude, I invite you to dive deeper into Python’s source code, experiment with different Python implementations, and explore the nuances of the language’s internals. Whether you’re looking to contribute to the core, enhance performance, or simply satisfy your curiosity, the possibilities are endless.Happy coding, and don’t hesitate to explore more about this beautiful language that powers much of today’s software development world!PythonData ScienceData AnalysisSqlPower Bi----2Written by Rohan jha18 followers·10 followingTalk about : Java | Golang | Cloud & DevOpsHelpStatusAboutCareersPressBlogStorePrivacyRulesTermsText to speech


===== SOURCE: What Are Python Concepts? | Coursera =====
URL: https://www.coursera.org/articles/python-concepts

What Are Python Concepts? | Coursera
For IndividualsFor BusinessesFor UniversitiesFor GovernmentsExploreDegrees​Log InJoin for FreeJoin for FreeDataData ScienceWhat Are Python Concepts?What Are Python Concepts?Written by Coursera Staff • Updated on Feb 13, 2026Unravel the core concepts of Python and discover why it's a go-to language for developers worldwide. Learn more about Python concepts and their applications, and explore careers that use Python. Key takeawaysPython centers on a few key concepts, including basic syntax, variables, control structures, data structures, and object-oriented programming.
According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), a software developer earns a median salary of $131,450 per year [1].
Several uses for Python include data science, web development, game development, and software development.
You can use the SciPy package in Python to make numerical computations.
Discover the core concepts you’ll need to start with Python and explore careers in the field. If you’re ready to begin developing your Python skill set, enroll in the Python for Everybody Specialization from the University of Michigan, where in as little as two months, you can learn about programming principles, database design, data visualization, Python programming, and more.
Python concepts: What are the basic concepts of Python?At its core, Python centers around several key concepts that ensure its ease of use and broad applicability. Python, renowned for its simplicity and readability, is one of today's most popular programming languages. It encompasses many concepts catering to beginners and seasoned professionals, making it highly versatile for various applications, from web development to data science.
First released in 1991 by Guido van Rossum, Python offers a design that focuses on simplicity and readability for faster learning and more efficient coding [2]. Its relevance across industries, including software development, machine learning, and scientific computing, underscores Python's utility in tackling modern computational challenges.
Explore Python concepts, from basic syntax to object-oriented programming, in more detail to better understand this versatile programming language.
Basic syntaxPython's clear syntax and dynamic typing system form the foundation of the language, enabling developers to write clear and logical code for various applications. Syntax in a language refers to the rules that govern the arrangement of words to be understood. Like the English language or any other natural language, Python’s syntax sets the rules that describe how to arrange the symbols so the computer can understand them. Python’s intuitive, easy-to-read syntax makes it accessible no matter your programming skill level. VariablesYou can use variables to store information within a Python program. For example, you might set the variable x to 1000 with the command x=1000. You can reference that variable later, and Python can access the information you stored there. Variables can store many different formats of information, including whole numbers, numbers with decimal points, strings (or a sequence of numbers, letters, or words), Booleans (or true/false values), lists of numbers or words, or tuples (ordered collections of values). Control structuresConcepts such as loops and conditional statements allow code execution based on specific conditions, making programs dynamic and responsive. You can set the conditions for the programs and determine the structure for how your program will flow based on the feedback from the program itself. For example, suppose you want to create a program to calculate your payroll costs and each employee’s paycheck. You might offer a bonus program where employees qualify for higher pay if they meet certain criteria. You could use a conditional structure to write a program that checks if each employee meets that criteria before determining the amount you need to pay them. Data structuresPython is rich in integrated data structures, including lists, dictionaries, sets, and tuples, which help increase the efficiency of working with and storing data. Each of these data formats requires you to structure the data in a different way that signals to the computer how to work with the data, determining whether the numbers can be moved around, rearranged, or changed. For example, you might want to create a list that you can manipulate so the numbers inside will change as you complete calculations, or you might need to create a list that must remain the same for the entirety of the program. Here, choosing a list or a tuple will offer different functionalities based on your needs. Functions and modulesThese concepts promote code reusability and modularity, allowing for organized and scalable code development. A function is a subset of code that runs a program. Complex computer programs run many individual functions to create the entire program, and you can reuse them as needed when the program repeats the same task. A module is similar to a function in that you can create scripts (longer programs that include functions and variables) and save them to a plug-and-play module system to quickly return to the program you created. You can access functions and modules that others created in Python to quickly begin coding using prebuilt pieces.
Read more: How to Learn Coding
Object-oriented programming (OOP)Object-oriented programming is a type of programming language that groups variables and functions into objects that contain both the data and the instructions for what the program should do with that data. Python's support for OOP principles enables developers to create objects with attributes and methods, leading to more intuitive and maintainable code.
Python usesPython's versatility lies in its wide range of applications. It also features many different libraries and frameworks to enhance its usability across domains. For example, you can perform web development with Django and numerical computations with SciPy.
Some applications of Python include the following:
Web and internet development: Frameworks such as Django, Pyramid, Flask, and Bottle can help you build websites and applications more easily and quickly.
Data science: Python offers useful packages and libraries for data science, such as SciPy and Pandas. Python can quickly analyze large data sets and is a time-saving tool for data scientists.
Software and application development: Python is useful for prototyping new apps or software because it allows you to easily and quickly start coding a minimum viable product.
Game development: Python is also useful for game development. Using Python, you can visualize your game coming together more quickly so that you can focus on gameplay mechanics, story, and other game design mechanics.
Artificial intelligence: Python’s vast offering of libraries and frameworks with data science capabilities also lends itself to machine learning and artificial intelligence applications.
Who uses Python?Python's accessibility and wide-ranging applications make it a favored language among software engineers, data scientists, AI researchers, and hobbyists. Explore careers that may require working with Python, including software development, data science, or web development.
Software developerMedian annual salary: $131,450 [1]
Job outlook (projected growth from 2024 to 2034): 15 percent [1]
Educational requirements: To begin working as a software developer, you typically need a bachelor’s degree in computer science, engineering, or mathematics.
As a software developer, you will work with clients to understand their software needs and design, build, test, and integrate software to help them meet their goals. You may also recommend upgrades and changes to your client’s software systems. In this role, you may specialize in specific types of software, such as mobile applications or systems software. Data scientistMedian annual salary: $112,590 [3]
Job outlook (projected growth from 2024 to 2034): 34 percent [3]
Educational requirements: To start a career as a data scientist, you must earn a bachelor’s degree. Common areas of study include mathematics, statistics, computer science, or a similar field.
You will categorize, visualize, and analyze data as a data scientist. Once you draw insights from data, you can use data visualization to present your findings to the stakeholders of your projects. Data science has applications in many industries, so you could work in machine learning, research, and academic settings, or business strategy in a corporate context. Web developerMedian annual salary: $95,380 [4]
Job outlook (projected growth from 2024 to 2034): 7 percent [4]
Educational requirements: While some employers prefer candidates with a bachelor’s degree in computer science or a related field, you may be able to start a career as a web developer with a high school diploma and relevant skills or certifications.
As a web developer, you will work with clients to create or improve websites to help them meet their business goals. In this role, you could work to help create content and decide what information will go on each page of the website, write code that powers the look and functionality of the website, design graphics, or monitor live websites for metrics that offer insights into performance.
Limitations of PythonAlthough Python is popular for many reasons, such as its versatility, intuitive syntax, and the resources and documentation available for beginners, it also has limitations you should be aware of. For example, unlike other programming languages, Python requires a lot of memory to be flexible and easy to use.
It also runs more slowly than other programming languages. As a result, you may choose to use Python for prototyping applications and another language for your finished, published project. Another limitation of Python is that, because of its versatility and adaptability, you may use it for purposes that another coding language can fulfill.
Python is a powerful tool in your programming skill set, but you should also feel encouraged to look for better solutions when available.
Keep up with tips and trends regarding PythonJoin Career Chat on LinkedIn to get timely updates on popular skills, tools, and certifications in software development. Build or refresh your Python skills with our other free resources:
Watch on YouTube: 10 Beginner Python Projects to BOOST Your Programming Skills
Discover a feature in Python: How to Use For Loops in Python: Step by Step
Learn the terminology: Python Glossary: Essential Terms and Definitions
Accelerate your career growth with a Coursera Plus subscription. When you enroll in either the monthly or annual option, you’ll get access to over 10,000 courses.
Unlock access to 10,000+ courses with a subscriptionStart trial
Article sources1. US Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Software Developers, Quality Assurance Analysts, and Testers: Occupational Outlook Handbook, https://www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-and-information-technology/software-developers.htm.” Accessed February 9, 2026.2. Python Institute. “Python – The Language of Today and Tomorrow, https://pythoninstitute.org/about-python.” Accessed February 9, 2026.3. US Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Data Scientists: Occupational Outlook Handbook, https://www.bls.gov/ooh/math/data-scientists.htm.” Accessed February 9, 2026.4. US Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Web Developers and Digital Designers: Occupational Outlook Handbook, https://www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-and-information-technology/web-developers.htm.” Accessed February 9, 2026.View all sourcesUpdated on Feb 13, 2026Written by:CCoursera StaffEditorial TeamCoursera’s editorial team is comprised of highly experienced professional editors, writers, and fact...This content has been made available for informational purposes only. Learners are advised to conduct additional research to ensure that courses and other credentials pursued meet their personal, professional, and financial goals.
Coursera FooterSkillsAccountingArtificial Intelligence (AI)CybersecurityData AnalyticsDigital MarketingHuman Resources (HR)Microsoft ExcelProject ManagementPythonSQLProfessional CertificatesGoogle AI CertificateGoogle Cybersecurity CertificateGoogle Data Analytics CertificateGoogle IT Support CertificateGoogle Project Management CertificateGoogle UX Design CertificateIBM AI Engineering CertificateIBM AI Product Manager CertificateIBM Data Science CertificateIntuit Academy Bookkeeping CertificateCourses & SpecializationsAI Essentials SpecializationAI For Business SpecializationAI For Everyone CourseAI in Healthcare SpecializationDeep Learning SpecializationExcel Skills for Business SpecializationFinancial Markets CourseMachine Learning SpecializationPrompt Engineering for ChatGPT CoursePython for Everybody SpecializationCareer ResourcesCareer Aptitude TestCAPM Certification RequirementsCompTIA A+ Certification RequirementsCompTIA Security+ Certification RequirementsEssential IT CertificationsHigh-Income Skills to LearnHow to Learn Artificial IntelligencePMP Certification RequirementsPopular Cybersecurity CertificationsShare your Coursera learning storyCourseraAboutWhat We OfferLeadershipCareersCatalogCoursera PlusProfessional CertificatesMasterTrack® CertificatesDegreesFor EnterpriseFor GovernmentFor CampusBecome a PartnerSocial ImpactFree CoursesUdemyCommunityLearnersPartnersBeta TestersBlogThe Coursera PodcastTech BlogMorePressInvestorsTermsPrivacyHelpAccessibilityContactArticlesDirectoryAffiliatesModern Slavery StatementCookies Preference CenterLearn Anywhere© 2026 Coursera Inc. All rights reserved.


===== SOURCE: Python Architecture Essentials: Building Scalable and Clean Application for Juniors - DEV Community =====
URL: https://dev.to/markparker5/python-architecture-essentials-building-scalable-and-clean-application-for-juniors-2o14

Python Architecture Essentials: Building Scalable and Clean Application for Juniors - DEV Community
More...
Python Architecture Essentials: Building Scalable and Clean Application for Juniors
How We Built an AI Startup in a Weekend Hackathon in Germany
Dr. House — AI Diagnostician in your phone. Passing the Startup Torch to Capable Hands
Python Architecture Essentials: Building Scalable and Clean Application for Juniors
Structuring a project with SOLID, KISS, DRY, and clean code principles, along with efficient design patterns. In simple words with real examples.
Dive into the fundamentals of scalable and clean application architecture in Python with this beginner-friendly guide. Here, we explore essential concepts such as Object-Oriented Programming (OOP), SOLID principles, Dependency Injection (DI), and typing. This article is designed to take you from zero to hero, transforming complex architectural standards into actionable insights that enhance modularity, low coupling, and high cohesion. Through practical examples, you'll learn how to develop multilayered architectures that ensure modularity and independence, preparing you for successful, maintainable projects.
Before diving into architecture, I would like to answer a few frequently asked questions:
What are the benefits of specifying types in Python?
What are the reasons for splitting an app into layers?
What are the advantages of using OOP?
What are the drawbacks of using global variables or singletons?
Feel free to skip the theory sections if you already know the answers and jump directly to the "Building the App" section.
Annotating all types in Python significantly enhances your code by increasing its clarity, robustness, and maintainability:
Type Safety: Type annotations help catch type mismatches early, reducing bugs and ensuring your code behaves as expected.
Self-documenting Code: Type hints increase the readability of your code and act as built-in documentation, clarifying the expected input and output data types of functions.
Improved Code Quality: Employing type hints encourages better design and architecture, promoting thoughtful planning and implementation of data structures and interfaces.
Enhanced Tool Support: Tools like mypy utilize type annotations for static type checking, identifying potential errors before runtime, thus enhancing the development process.
Support from Modern Libraries: Libraries such as FastAPI and Pydantic leverage type annotations to provide functionalities like automatic data validation, schema generation, and comprehensive API documentation.
Advantages of Typed Dataclasses Over Simple Data Structures: Typed dataclasses improve readability, structured data handling, and type safety compared to dicts and tuples. They use attributes instead of string keys, which minimizes errors due to typos and improves code autocompletion. Dataclasses also provide clear definitions of data structures, support default values, and simplify code maintenance and debugging.
Why Do We Need to Split the App Into Layers
Splitting an application into layers enhances maintainability, scalability, and flexibility. Key reasons for this strategy include:
Each layer focuses on a specific aspect, which simplifies development, debugging and maintenance.
Layers can be reused in different parts of the application or in other projects. Code duplication is eliminated.
Allows different layers to scale independently of each other depending on needs.
Simplifies maintenance by localizing common functions in separate layers.
#### Improved collaboration
Teams can work on different layers independently.
#### Flexibility and adaptability
Changes in technology or design can be implemented in specific layers. Only the affected layers need to be adapted, the others remain unaffected.
Each layer can be tested independently, simplifying unit testing and debugging.
Adopting a layered architecture offers significant advantages in development speed, operational management, and long-term maintenance, making systems more robust, manageable, and adaptable to change.
Global Constants vs Injected Parameters
When developing software, the choice between using global constants and employing dependency injection (DI) can significantly impact the flexibility, maintainability, and scalability of applications. This analysis delves into the drawbacks of global constants and contrasts them with the advantages provided by dependency injection.
Fixed Configuration: Global constants are static and cannot dynamically adapt to different environments or requirements without modifying the codebase. This rigidity limits their utility across diverse operational scenarios.
Limited Testing Scope: Testing becomes challenging with global constants as they are not easily overridden. Developers might need to alter the global state or employ complex workarounds to accommodate different test scenarios, thereby increasing the risk of errors.
Reduced Modularity: Relying on global constants decreases modularity since components become dependent on specific values being set globally. This dependence reduces the reusability of components across different projects or contexts.
Tight Coupling: Global constants integrate specific behaviors and configurations directly into the codebase, making it difficult to adapt or evolve the application without extensive modifications.
Hidden Dependencies: Similar to global variables, global constants obscure the dependencies within an application. It becomes unclear which parts of the system rely on these constants, complicating both the understanding and the maintenance of the code.
Namespace Pollution and Scalability Challenges: Global constants can clutter the namespace and complicate the scaling of applications. They promote a design that isn't modular, hindering efficient distribution across different processes.
Maintenance and Refactoring Difficulties: Over time, the use of global constants can lead to maintenance challenges. Refactoring such a codebase is risky as changes to the constants might inadvertently affect disparate parts of the application.
Module-Level State Duplication: In Python, module-level code might be executed multiple times if imports occur under different paths (e.g., absolute vs. relative). This can lead to duplication of global instances and hard-to-track maintenance bugs, further complicating the application’s stability and predictability.
Dynamic Flexibility and Configurability: Dependency injection allows for the dynamic configuration of components, making applications adaptable to varying conditions without needing code changes.
Enhanced Testability: DI improves testability by enabling the injection of mock objects or alternative configurations during tests, effectively isolating components from external dependencies and ensuring more reliable test outcomes.
Increased Modularity and Reusability: Components become more modular and reusable as they are designed to operate with any injected parameters that conform to expected interfaces. This separation of concerns enhances the portability of components across various parts of an application or even different projects.
Loose Coupling: Injected parameters promote loose coupling by decoupling the system’s logic from its configuration. This approach facilitates easier updates and changes to the application.
Explicit Dependency Declaration: With DI, components clearly declare their dependencies, typically through constructor parameters or setters. This clarity makes the system easier to understand, maintain, and extend.
Scalability and Complexity Management: As applications grow, DI helps manage complexity by localizing concerns and separating configuration from usage, aiding in the effective scaling and maintenance of large systems.
Using Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) and Dependency Injection (DI) can significantly enhance code quality and maintainability compared to a procedural approach with global variables and functions. Here's a simple comparison that demonstrates these advantages:
Procedural Approach: Global Variables and Functions
def connect_to_database():
print(f"Connecting to database on {database_config['host']}...")
# Assume connection is made
return "database_connection"
def fetch_user(database_connection, user_id):
print(f"Fetching user {user_id} using {database_connection}")
return {'id': user_id, 'name': 'John Doe'}
db_connection = connect_to_database()
user = fetch_user(db_connection, 1)
Code Duplication: database_config must be passed around or accessed globally in multiple functions.
Testing Difficulty: Mocking the database connection or configuration involves manipulating global state, which is error-prone.
Tight Coupling: Functions directly depend on global state and specific implementations.
from typing import Dict, Optional
from abc import ABC, abstractmethod
class DatabaseConnection(ABC):
def connect(self):
def fetch_user(self, user_id: int) -> Dict:
class MySQLConnection(DatabaseConnection):
def __init__(self, config: Dict[str, str]):
def connect(self):
print(f"Connecting to MySQL database on {self.config['host']}...")
# Assume connection is made
def fetch_user(self, user_id: int) -> Dict:
print(f"Fetching user {user_id} from MySQL")
return {'id': user_id, 'name': 'John Doe'}
class UserService:
def __init__(self, db_connection: DatabaseConnection):
self.db_connection = db_connection
def get_user(self, user_id: int) -> Dict:
return self.db_connection.fetch_user(user_id)
db = MySQLConnection(config)
user_service = UserService(db)
user = user_service.get_user(1)
Reduced Code Duplication: The database configuration is encapsulated within the connection object; no need to pass it around.
DI Possibilities: Easily switch out MySQLConnection with another database connection class without changing UserService code.
Encapsulation and Abstraction: Implementation details of how users are fetched or how the database is connected are hidden away.
Ease of Mocking and Testing: UserService can be easily tested by injecting a mock or stub of DatabaseConnection.
Object Lifetime Management: The lifecycle of database connections can be managed more granularly (e.g., using context managers).
Use of OOP Principles: Demonstrates inheritance (abstract base class), polymorphism (implementing abstract methods), and protocols (interfaces defined by DatabaseConnection).
By structuring the application using OOP and DI, the code becomes more modular, easier to test, and flexible to changes, such as swapping out dependencies or changing configurations.
You can find all examples and more details with comments at the repo
Just a short check-list:
1. Project and Dependency Management with Poetry
Poetry shines not only as a project creation tool but also excels in managing dependencies and virtual environments. Start by setting up your project structure using the following command:
poetry new python-app-architecture-demo
This command crafts a well-organized directory structure: separate folders for Python code and tests, with a root directory for meta-information like pyproject.toml, lock files, and git configurations.
2. Version Control with Git
Initialize Git in your project directory:
Add a .gitignore file to exclude unnecessary files from your repository. Use the standard Python .gitignore provided by GitHub, and append any specific exclusions like .DS_Store for macOS or IDE configs (.idea, .vscode, .zed, etc):
wget -O .gitignore https://raw.githubusercontent.com/github/gitignore/main/Python.gitignore
echo .DS_Store >> .gitignore
Install your project’s dependencies using Poetry:
poetry add fastapi pytest aiogram
You can install all dependencies later using:
Refer to the official documentation of each library if you need more specific instructions.
Create a config.py file to centralize your application settings—a common and effective approach.
Set environment variables for secrets and parameters:
.env contains sensitive data and should be git-ignored, while example.env holds placeholder or default values and is checked into the repository.
5. Application Entry Point
Define the entry point of your application in main.py:
python_app_architecture/main.py:
def run():
if __name__ == '__main__': # avoid run on import
Make your project usable as a library and allow programmatic access by importing the run function in the __init__.py:
python_app_architecture/init.py
Enable direct project execution with Poetry by adding a shortcut in __main__.py. This allows you to use the command poetry run python python_app_architecture instead of the longer poetry run python python_app_architecture/main.py.
python_app_architecture/main.py:
Defining Directories and Layers
Disclaimer:
Of course, every application is different and their architecture will differ depending on the goals and objectives. I'm not saying that this is the only correct option, but I think that this one is fairly average and suitable for a big part of projects. Try to focus on main approaches and ideas rather than specific examples.
Now, let's setup directories for different layers of the application.
Typically, it's wise to version your API (e.g., by creating subdirectories like api/v1), but we'll keep things simple for now and omit this step.
.
├── python_app_architecture_demo
Entities — App-wide data structures. Purely carriers of data with no embedded logic.
General — The utility belt! A consolidated hub for shared utilities, helpers, and library facades.
Mappers — Specialists in data translation, converting between data forms like database models to entities or between different data formats. It's good practice to encapsulate mappers to its usage boundary instead of making them global. For example, models-entities mapper may be part of the repository module. Another example: schemas-entities mapper must stay inside api service and be its private tool.
Providers — The backbone of core business logic. Providers implement the main logic of the application but remain agnostic of the interface details, ensuring their operations are abstract and isolated.
Repository — The librarians. Custodians of data access, abstracting the complexities of data source interactions through models, thus isolating database operations from the broader app.
Models — Definitions of local data structures interacting with the database, distinct and isolated from Entities.
Services — Each service acts as a (almost) standalone sub-application, orchestrating its specific domain of business logic while delegating foundational tasks to providers. This configuration ensures centralized and uniform application-wide logic
API Service — Manages external communications via HTTP/S, structured around a FastAPI framework.
Dependencies — Essential tools and helpers required by various parts of your API, integrated via FastAPI’s DI system.
Endpoints — Routes that publicly expose your business logic via HTTP.
Schemas — Data structure definitions for API inputs and outputs, confined to their service layer to maintain encapsulation.
Telegram Service — Operates similarly to the API Service, providing functionality via Telegram without replicating the core business logic. This is achieved by calling the same providers that API Service uses, ensuring consistency and reducing code redundancy.
Tests — Dedicated solely to testing, this directory contains all test code, maintaining a clear separation from application logic.
The connection between layers will look something like this:
Note that entities are not active components, but only data structures that are passed between layers:
Keep in mind that layers are not directly connected, but only depend on abstractions. Implementations are passed using dependency injection:
This flexible structure allows you to easily add functionality, for example, change the database, create a service, or connect a new interface without extra changes or code duplication, because logic of each module is located on its own layer:
At the same time, all logic of a separate service is encapsulated within it:
Let's start from the endpoint:
# api_service/api/endpoints/user.py
from typing import Annotated
from fastapi import APIRouter, Depends, HTTPException, status
from entities.user import UserCreate
from ..dependencies.providers import (
provider: Annotated[UserProvider, Depends(user_provider)] # 4
):
provider.create_user(user) # 5
return {"message": "User created!"}
Importing dependency injection helper function (we will look at it in a minute)
Importing UserProvider protocol for type annotation
Endpoint requires the request's body to have UserCreate scheme in json format
The provider parameter in the register function is an instance of implementation of UserProvider, injected by FastAPI using the Depends mechanism.
The create_user method of the UserProvider is called with the parsed user data. This demonstrates a clear separation of concerns, where the API layer delegates business logic to the provider layer, adhering to the principle that interface layers should not contain business logic.
Now, let's see the business logic:
# providers/user_provider.py
from typing import Protocol, runtime_checkable, Callable
from typing_extensions import runtime_checkable
from repository import UserRepository
from providers.mail_provider import MailProvider
from entities.user import UserCreate
class UserProvider(Protocol): # 1
def create_user(self, user: UserCreate): ...
class UserProviderOutput(Protocol): # 2
def user_provider_created_user(self, provider: UserProvider, user: UserCreate): ...
class UserProviderImpl: # 3
repository: UserRepository, # 4
mail_provider: MailProvider, # 4
output: UserProviderOutput | None, # 5
on_user_created: Callable[[UserCreate], None] | None # 6
):
self.repository = repository
self.mail_provider = mail_provider
self.on_user_created = on_user_created
def create_user(self, user: UserCreate): # 7
self.repository.add_user(user) # 8
self.mail_provider.send_mail(user.email, f"Welcome, {user.name}!") # 9
if output := self.output: # unwraping the optional
output.user_provider_created_user(self, user) # 10
if on_user_created := self.on_user_created:
Defining the Interface: UserProvider is a protocol that specifies the method create_user, which any class adhering to this protocol must implement. It serves as a formal contract for user creation functionality.
Observer Protocol: UserProviderOutput serves as an observer (or delegate) that is notified when a user is created. This protocol enables loose coupling and enhances the event-driven architecture of the application.
Protocol Implementation: UserProviderImpl implements the user creation logic but does not need to explicitly declare its adherence to UserProvider due to Python's dynamic nature and the use of duck typing.
Core Dependencies: The constructor accepts UserRepository and MailProvider—both defined as protocols—as parameters. By relying solely on these protocols, the UserProviderImpl remains decoupled from specific implementations, illustrating the principles of Dependency Injection where the provider is agnostic of the underlying details, interfacing only through defined contracts.
Optional Output Delegate: The constructor accepts an optional UserProviderOutput instance, which, if provided, will be notified upon the completion of user creation.
Callback Function: As an alternative to the output delegate, a callable on_user_created can be passed to handle additional actions post-user creation, providing flexibility in response to events.
Central Business Logic: The create_user method encapsulates the main business logic for adding a user, demonstrating separation from API handling.
Repository Interaction: Utilizes the UserRepository to abstract the database operations (e.g., adding a user), ensuring the provider does not directly manipulate the database.
Extended Business Logic: Involves sending an email through MailProvider, illustrating that the provider's responsibilities can extend beyond simple CRUD operations.
Event Notification: If an output delegate is provided, it notifies this delegate about the user creation event, leveraging the observer pattern for enhanced interactivity and modular reactions to events.
Callback Execution: Optionally executes a callback function, providing a straightforward method to extend functionality without complex class hierarchies or dependencies.
Ok, but how to instantiate the provider and inject it? Let's take a look at the injection code, powered by FastAPI's DI engine:
# services/api_service/api/dependencies/providers.py
from typing import Annotated
from fastapi import Request, Depends
from repository import UserRepository
from providers.user_provider import UserProvider, UserProviderImpl
from providers.mail_provider import MailProvider
from coordinator import Coordinator
from .database import get_session, Session
def _get_coordinator(request: Request) -> Coordinator:
# NOTE: You can pass the DIContainer in the same way
return request.app.state.coordinator
session: Annotated[Session, Depends(get_session)], # 1
coordinator: Annotated[Coordinator, Depends(_get_coordinator)] # 2
# UserProvider's lifecycle is bound to short endpoint's lifecycle, so it's safe to use strong references here
return UserProviderImpl( # 4
repository=UserRepository(session), # 5
mail_provider=MailProvider(config.mail_token), # 6
on_user_created=coordinator.on_user_created # 8
# on_user_created: lambda: coordinator.on_user_created() # add a lambda if the method's signature is not compatible
Getting a database session through FastAPI's dependency injection system, ensuring that each request has a clean session.
Obtaining an instance of Coordinator from the application state, which is responsible for managing broader application-level tasks and acting as an event manager.
Note: the function returns protocol but not the exact implementation
Constructing an instance of UserProviderImpl by injecting all the necessary dependencies. This demonstrates a practical application of dependency injection to assemble complex objects.
Initializing UserRepository with the session obtained from FastAPI's DI system. This repository handles all data persistence operations, abstracting the database interactions from the provider.
Setting up MailProvider using a configuration token.
Injecting Coordinator as the output protocol. This assumes that Coordinator implements the UserProviderOutput protocol, allowing it to receive notifications when a user is created.
Assigns a method from Coordinator as a callback to be executed upon user creation. This allows for additional operations or notifications to be triggered as a side effect of the user creation process.
This structured approach ensures that the UserProvider is equipped with all necessary tools to perform its tasks effectively, while adhering to the principles of loose coupling and high cohesion.
The Coordinator class acts as the main orchestrator within your application, managing various services, interactions, events, setting the initial state, and injecting dependencies. Here's a detailed breakdown of its roles and functionalities based on the provided code:
from threading import Thread
from services.api_service import get_app as get_fastapi_app
from entities.user import UserCreate
from repository.user_repository import UserRepository
from providers.mail_provider import MailProvider
from providers.user_provider import UserProvider, UserProviderImpl
from services.report_service import ReportService
from services.telegram_service import TelegramService
class Coordinator:
def __init__(self):
self.telegram_service = TelegramService( # 2
token=config.telegram_token,
get_user_provider=lambda session: UserProviderImpl(
repository=UserRepository(session),
mail_provider=MailProvider(config.mail_token),
on_user_created=self.on_user_created
self.report_service = ReportService(
get_users_count = lambda: self.users_count # 3
def setup_initial_state(self):
fastapi_app = get_fastapi_app()
fastapi_app.state.coordinator = self # 4
fastapi_thread = Thread(target=lambda: uvicorn.run(fastapi_app))
self.report_service.start()
self.telegram_service.start()
# UserProviderOutput Protocol Implementation
def user_provider_created_user(self, provider: UserProvider, user: UserCreate):
self.on_user_created(user)
def on_user_created(self, user):
print("User created: ", user)
if self.users_count >= 10_000:
self.report_service.interval_seconds *= 10
elif self.users_count >= 10_000_000:
self.report_service.stop() # 8
Some state can be shared between different providers, services, layers, and the entire app
Assembling implementations and injecting dependencies
Be aware of circular references, deadlocks, and memory leaks here, see the full code for detatils
Pass the coordinator instance to the FastAPI app state so you can access it in the endpoints via FastAPI's DI system
Start all services in separate threads
Already runs in a separate thread inside the service
Some cross-service logic here, just for example
Example of controlling services from the coordinator
This orchestrator centralizes control and communication between different components, enhancing manageability and scalability of the application. It effectively coordinates actions across services, ensuring that the application responds appropriately to state changes and user interactions. This design pattern is crucial for maintaining a clean separation of concerns and enabling more robust and flexible application behavior.
However, in large-scale applications manual DI can lead to a significant amount of boilerplate code. This is when DI Container comes to rescue. DI Containers, or Dependency Injection Containers, are powerful tools used in software development to manage dependencies within an application. They serve as a central location where objects and their dependencies are registered and managed. When an object requires a dependency, the DI Container automatically handles the instantiation and provision of these dependencies, ensuring that objects receive all the necessary components to function effectively. This approach promotes loose coupling, enhances testability, and improves the overall maintainability of the codebase by abstracting the complex logic of dependency management away from the business logic of the application. DI Containers simplify the development process by automating and centralizing the configuration of component dependencies.
For python, there are many libraries providing different DI Container implementations, I looked almost all of them and wrote down the best IMO
python-dependency-injector — automated, class-based, has different lifecycle options like Singleton or Factory
lagom — a dictionary interface with automatic resolve
dishka — good scope control via context manager
that-depends — support for context managers (objects required to be closed in the end), native fastapi integration
punq — more classic approach with register and resolve methods
rodi — classic, simple, automatic
For the end, let's update the main.py file:
from coordinator import Coordinator
def run(): # entry point, no logic here, only run the coordinator
coordinator = Coordinator()
coordinator.setup_initial_state()
if name == 'main':
To gain a comprehensive understanding of the architectural and implementation strategies discussed, it is beneficial to review all files in the repository. Despite the limited amount of code, each file is enriched with insightful comments and additional details that offer a deeper understanding of the application’s structure and functionality. Exploring these aspects will enhance your familiarity with the system, ensuring you are well-equipped to adapt or expand the application effectively.
This approach is universally beneficial across various Python applications. It's effective for stateless backend servers such as those built with FastAPI, but its advantages are particularly pronounced in no-framework apps and applications that manage state. This includes desktop applications (both GUI and command-line), as well as systems that control physical devices like IoT devices, robotics, drones, and other hardware-centric technologies.
Additionally, I highly recommend reading Clean Code by Robert Martin for further enrichment. You can find a summary and key takeaways here. This resource will provide you with foundational principles and practices that are crucial for maintaining high standards in software development.
How We Built an AI Startup in a Weekend Hackathon in Germany
Dr. House — AI Diagnostician in your phone. Passing the Startup Torch to Capable Hands
Python Architecture Essentials: Building Scalable and Clean Application for Juniors
Templates let you quickly answer FAQs or store snippets for re-use.
Are you sure you want to hide this comment? It will become hidden in your post, but will still be visible via the comment's permalink.
Hide child comments as well
For further actions, you may consider blocking this person and/or reporting abuse
AI-powered Mobile App with Backend in Two Days + MVVMP Architecture Overview (Tutorial)
How We Built an AI Startup in a Weekend Hackathon in Germany
Thank you to our Diamond Sponsors for supporting the DEV Community
Google AI is the official AI Model and Platform Partner of DEV
Neon is the official database partner of DEV
Algolia is the official search partner of DEV
DEV Community — A space to discuss and keep up software development and manage your software career
Built on Forem — the open source software that powers DEV and other inclusive communities.
Made with love and Ruby on Rails. DEV Community © 2016 - 2026.
We're a place where coders share, stay up-to-date and grow their careers.


===== SOURCE: Introduction to Python Programming and its Key Features =====
URL: https://www.aezion.com/blogs/introduction-to-python-programming

Introduction to Python Programming and its Key FeaturesServicesDigital EngineeringData EngineeringQuality EngineeringApplication ManagementCloud EngineeringInnovation EngineeringIndustriesHealthcareConstructionRetailManufacturingFinanceResourcesSuccess StoriesBlogseBooksWhitepapersAbout UsCareersContact UsBackIntroduction to Python Programming: Key Features and Practical ApplicationMay 27, 2025 | Digital EngineeringSummary The power of Python, its simplicity, and flexibility mean it is fast becoming the go-to language for companies looking to create software that can be expanded and managed efficiently and scalably. This blog examines how Custom Software Development teams use Python to create dynamic, future-proof software.Introduction Python is fast becoming one of the most popular programming languages in the world, and its use encompasses everything from websites to artificial intelligence. Python’s simplicity, vast libraries, and readability are well-suited to amateur coders and old-school engineers. Whether one’s building trivial automating scripts or full-on enterprise systems, the flexibility of Python enables dev teams to turn an idea into a product in mere seconds. For companies that want to innovate confidently, it is usually the foundation of practical custom software development projects.Why Python Matters: Modern Software DevelopmentIn the quickly evolving digital landscapes, companies must design platforms that allow businesses to scale without excess expenses. Python is the optimal balance of capability and usability for agile development teams or enterprise applications. Its versatility supports AI, automation, IoT, and innovation, making it a future language. What is Python? Python is an advanced but simple computer language to learn. Its extensiveness is why so many developers use it; it has a simple syntax and is general in nature. Python is a multi-paradigm programming language because it employs both object-oriented and functional programming. It is mostly used for developing web applications, automation, artificial intelligence, and data science.Because of its flexible nature, Python is generous enough to fit various project requirements. Through Python development services, specific solutions are readily adaptable for business entities interested in simplifying their development process, whether web application development or business process automation.Key Features and Advantages of Python Now, let’s look at a few of Python’s key features and benefits for supporting scalable software development and engineering.Multi-paradigm support—Python is a multi-paradigm language that allows writing in several different styles. It can be written in procedural, object-oriented, functional, or imperative code styles.Community—Python is an open-source technology supported by a large community for sustaining usage, making it easily consumable by organizations. Additionally, Python has systems that sustain and use it for users.Cross-Platform—Python Applications can be run on almost all platforms, such as Windows, Mac, and Linux, so it is the best programming language for creating cross-platform applications.Frameworks & Libraries—Python has Data science, machine learning, web development, and other capabilities. It also uses external libraries and platforms like NumPy, Pandas, TensorFlow, Django, and Flask.Object-Oriented Programming in Python Python is an Object-Oriented Programming Language. Object-oriented programmers design programs based on the core principles of OOP, Abstraction, Encapsulation, Polymorphism, Inheritance, etc. The foundation of Object-Oriented Programming is the Class. The Class is an abstraction of an object and provides the means to programmatically create, modify, and manipulate an object.A Python program consists of classes representing key elements and their behaviors within a system.Abstraction Abstraction is the concept of object-oriented programming that digital engineers use to hide complex implementation details and show only an object’s or process’s essential features. This concept helps shift the focus to what an object does rather than how it does it.In Python, abstraction is often implemented using abstract classes and interfaces. These allow software development companies to define methods that must be implemented by any subclass, without providing the full implementation in the base class.Encapsulation Encapsulation allows one to hide the internal details or implementation of one object from another object (s). This protects against accidental or direct access and modifications to the data. Python relies on encapsulation and other conventions to manage access to and use class variables or methods. One can restrict access to variables/methods with public, private, and protected. A variable or method that is prefixed with a double underscore “__” is treated as private in Python.Polymorphism Polymorphism is the term for ‘many shapes’. It is an OOP approach that permits one to define multiple shapes for a standard interface. Python’s execution of polymorphism is very similar to that of other OOP languages such as C++, Java, C#, etc. Polymorphic operations in Python are achieved through method overloading and overriding.Defining a class A class is defined using the keyword class. Here’s an example of a student class – consisting of the constructor __init__ – a specific method invoked as part of the object creation.The code snippets above and below are reused from Reference: Python Class –https://pymbook.readthedocs.io/en/latest/classes.htmlNotice how the methods are defined using the keyword def. The ‘print_details’ method also takes ‘self’ as a parameter and prints the student’s name, branch, and year.Inheritance Inheritance is a core object-oriented concept in the Python programming language. It allows one to reuse or extend the functionality or features of one or more ” inherited ” classes in a new class. The concept of inheritance in Python is similar to other high-level programming languages, such as C#, Java, etc.Let’s define a Person class by using a method to get the person’s details.Now, let us revise the “Student” class to inherit from “Person” so it can get all the features of Person.Once we inherit from the person, the student gets the behavior “get_details”. Notice, however, that the revised Student class overrides the behavior of “get_details” and adds its functionality.Note – It’s up to the implementor to decide whether to override a methodReal-World Examples Using OOP in PythonOOP is used extensively in developing: CRM applications where classes represent Customers, Contacts, and Sales information.E-commerce sites employ classes to handle products, orders, and payments.Game development to handle GameObjects, Characters, and Levels.Web applications, where OOP can guide the composition of reusable pieces and views.Practical Use Cases of Python Python is versatile enough to be applied in numerous practical, real-world use cases, especially in business-critical systems. In custom software development, Python finds extensive application in:Web Development: Custom app developers use web frameworks such as Django and Flask to develop applications using Python, which simplifies development.Machine Learning and Data Science: Many libraries exist for solution development for data science and ML, such as Pandas, NumPy, and TensorFlow, which provide means for predictive modeling and data analysis.Enterprise solutions: Enterprise application developers use the Python programming language to develop enterprise resource planning (ERP) and customer relationship management (CRM) solutions.Automation: Developers can use scripting to support automation solutions and automate repetitive tasks using Python.Why Choose Python for Custom Software Development?Selecting Python for your software project isn’t simply a matter of popularity, it’s a matter of strategic advantage.Quick Development: Python’s syntax is simple and readable, enabling teams to develop features rapidly and lower development cycles.Enriched Ecosystem: There are thousands of third-party libraries available, and developers need not reinvent the wheel for tasks such as user authentication, payment gateways, or data analysis.Scalability: Python applications can scale effortlessly when developed with the appropriate architectural patterns (e.g., microservices using FastAPI, Celery for task queues).Seamless Integration: Python can be connected to C/C++, Java, .NET, and more making it an excellent choice for mixed environments.Community and Longevity: With millions of programmers across the globe, great documentation, and years of established success, Python is a sound long-term bet for corporations.Conclusion As seen in this blog, Python is a compelling language. Developers prefer it because of its simple and flexible features. This is an excellent language for developing custom software solutions. Essentially, any custom software development company is either developing web applications, building automated business workflows, or integrating machine learning models. Python provides tools and libraries that allow development companies to help bring ideas from our clients to fruition.Also, using Python development services allows you to build scalable, maintainable, and future-proof software. At Aezion, we provide Python-based custom solutions developed to address your company’s needs. Contact our digital engineering team to learn how custom Python solutions can help transform your business.FAQs In what ways does Python facilitate Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)?Python employs OOP paradigms, such as abstraction, encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism. OOP allows developers to create reusable code that provides more organized applications.What makes Python so great for custom software development?Python is the best language for custom software development because of its readability, available libraries, and being a multi-paradigm language makes it easier overall to build scalable applications and create sustainable applications in a bounded time frame for a developer’s future.Is Python used for machine learning and data science?Yes, Python is a favorite language for machine learning and data science. This is due to Python’s great libraries like TensorFlow, Keras, and Pandas, which make it easier to develop smart systems.Popular PostsThe Real Cost of a Disputed Change Order: Why Contractors Leave 8–12% of Completed Work UnbilledJul 28, 2026 | BusinessIntroduction  Completed work can become unbilled revenue long before anyone realizes there is a problem. The issue is rarely whether the work was completed. In most cases, the work has already been done in the field. The problem starts when approvals, field notes,...read moreHow Enterprises Are Building Secure AI Solutions Without Exposing Sensitive DataJul 20, 2026 | Artificial IntelligenceIntroduction Business organizations are moving beyond experimenting with AI solutions and assessing how they may benefit core business activities. Planning, knowledge management, customer service, and decision-making are all areas where AI is part of daily business. ...read moreWhy Poor Data Quality Is Costing Enterprises Millions Every Year Jul 20, 2026 | Data EngineeringIntroduction  Data is the basis of operational planning, financial reporting, customer interactions, and AI applications. However, all of this depends on the accuracy and recency of data. Moreover, if the quality of data begins to deteriorate, it...read moreGet in TouchReady to discuss your project?Send us a brief description of your challenge to get the process startedWebsiteFirst NameLast NameEmailAezionLeave this field emptyWhat is Solve the math problem shown in the image to continue.SendHeadquartersFrisco, Texas, USADevelopment CentersNashville, Tennessee, USABangalore, IndiaCoimbatore, IndiaR & D LabMysore, IndiaIndustriesHealthcareConstructionRetailManufacturingFinanceServicesDigital EngineeringData EngineeringQuality EngineeringApplication ManagementCloud EngineeringInnovation EngineeringPoliciesPrivacy PolicyCopyright © 2026 Aezion, Inc. All Rights ReservedFollowFollowServicesDigital EngineeringData EngineeringQuality EngineeringApplication ManagementCloud EngineeringInnovation EngineeringIndustriesHealthcareConstructionRetailManufacturingFinanceResourcesSuccess StoriesBlogseBooksWhitepapersAbout UsCareersContact Us


===== SOURCE: Real world, practical use cases of Python for architectural design for beginners - Scripting - McNeel Forum =====
URL: https://discourse.mcneel.com/t/real-world-practical-use-cases-of-python-for-architectural-design-for-beginners/116753

Real world, practical use cases of Python for architectural design for beginners - Scripting - McNeel Forum
Real world, practical use cases of Python for architectural design for beginners
what do you use python for in your daily workflows? I am looking for examples to give to my students at the TU Darmstadt.
I am teaching a course on the basics of computational design that aims to cover the core concepts behind this broad field such as combinatorial design, generative design and computational analysis. Here is the intro video to the course (What is Computational Design? And 9 Concepts Related to It - YouTube).
The upcoming tutorial is about python scripting.
I plan to give a basic intro to the language but also want to illustrate the tutorial with a simple use case. I would like to avoid the most popular agents simulation example (flocking) as in my experience it had little practical relevance.
I have two questions to the community here:
What do you use python in for?
what would be for you the core python example for a complete beginner that is still linked to the design practice and not too computer-sciency
My idea is to point my students to this very post so I hope for an interesting discussion and a diverse set of example use cases.
My use for Python (directly in Rhino, not GH) is not as a design/generative tool, but rather as a way to streamline repetitive and complex/time consuming tasks and use them via aliases/toolbar buttons to work practically like Rhino native tools.
Cases in point might be scripts for interactive correction of contour curves for topo maps, trimming massive amounts of curves inside or outside of a closed boundary, projecting simple but copious numbers of building volumes to seat themselves on/in a terrain mesh/surface map, etc.
I use Python mostly do automate repetitive tasks, for which Rhino does not supply a good native answer.
Examples for this would be:
Mass text / annotation manipulation
Mass distribution of blocks / assets for realistic-ish landscapes
Mass layer manipulation for layouts
Design-wise Python really shines were it exceeds the capabilities of Grasshopper.
Any design that depends on recursion, or a graph-like structure, needs a programming language to back it.
An example for a design where I heavily used python would be those ‘Rhythmogramme’, which are based on simulating multiple pendulums:
Another example would be the manipulation of meshes, which are by-nature graph-like, to get interesting patterns, from for example a basic square tiling:
square_tiling1333×750 185 KB
square_tiling_21333×750 166 KB
When I started to learn python I really enjoyed doing fractals as they are nice to look at and by their recursive nature can’t be implemented in plain Grasshopper. As it’s still winter time and snowy right now, maybe start them off with some Koch snowflakes
antonsavov:
what do you use python for in your daily workflows? I am looking for examples to give to my students at the TU Darmstadt.
I most frequently use custom GHPython scripts for generating and optimizing stairs and windows/facades, and for coming up with very basic, random (ground)plan layouts (if I feel uninspired), but that I heavily rework manually later.
I also have a script which turns a simple line network into thickened outer and inner walls with customizable thicknesses, windows, doors, and floorplates, and diverse tagging and annotation tools.
I also use Python to do simulations (rainwater drainage, sun/shadow, etc).
Privately, I use GHPython for fun computational design projects.
Here are same examples:
2020-09-05 09-48-12.2020-09-05 09_59_16600×600 2.66 MB
ice-ray-lattice_V1_example818×608 231 KB
2019-12-02 22-12-37.2019-12-02 22_13_57802×804 3.51 MB
chaos_game_preview2011×700 293 KB
Beyond Rhino and Grasshopper, I use CPython to automate some general stuff on my computer and server. I dabble in Blender Python and have some hardware projects, where I use Mirco or CircuitPython to control or manage sensors, motors, servos, buttons, etc., when I’m too lazy to use Arduino (C++).
antonsavov:
what would be for you the core python example for a complete beginner that is still linked to the design practice and not too computer-sciency
Contrary to your experience, I think that agent-based simulations have lots of applications, especially in architecture (crowd and traffic simulations, water drainage simulations, discreet design, etc.), and are one of the best things to start with - after you get the Python basics down.
First of all, you can explore object-oriented programming and more modular code structures with different classes (mover/agent, particle system, etc.) and start very small and simple.
Second, particle systems can be quite easily extended or outfitted with other algorithms or principles to make them really fun and/or useful, beyond the Boyd-ish agent behaviors.
Also, they are usually animated which is kinda great for demonstrations, and seeing how things evolve over time.
They don’t have to look like the typical moving dot, arrow, or trail either. I’d think of it in a more abstract way. Each particle can represent no matter what geometry or data. The possibilities are literally endless!
I second @Helvetosaur and @lando.schumpich posts. This is what I have also used it most for. I had a similar activity teaching Python to architectural students, but my experience is that most of the students having a really hard time getting into this topic at all. So keeping it really simple, always fully and slowly explaining, is very important. Only a few will actually apply this knowledge at a later point. Usually selecting, modifying and creating geometry will totally enough for a beginner. I would also explain basic FileIO, string formatting and simple recursion, since this will be beneficial knowledge at a later point, plus some very basic math. Usually the small helper scripts are the most important ones. I wouldn’t even teach OOP at this point. But of course it depends on the hours such a course has… Oh and reading and dealing with errors is important. Debugging in general!
So I did a 3 day python in rhino and grasshopper course in the UK, by Long Nguyen, and I was the only non architect on the course. They all seemed to be most interested in data structures, and echo one of the above posts mentioning what extends the functionality of grasshopper with looping, as they were also all savvy with grasshopper and less interested in surface modelling (matching / blending etc).
I wanted to do more in native rhino, for removing repetitive standard rhino tasks and extending native rhino functions (for example, flow along surface to multiple target surfaces; because who wants to boot up grasshopper and then select a definition just to do that? Wouldn’t it be nicer to try and extend rhino functionality if you think it can be improved).
All the best for the class!
Thank you all for the examples and for sharing these inspiring images, @lando.schumpich and @diff-arch!
If I were to draw an intermediate summary of the main categories of examples, then we have:
automating repetitive 2D drafting tasks or such with large number of objects
automating 3D modelling tasks
reading and exporting data from files
crowd, water drainage simulation (agents-based)
discrete design (@diff-arch I like how you connected this to agents systems and not to the usual suspects of rule-based approaches such as L-Systems or Graph-Grammars)
fractals (recursion-based)
generating floor plan layouts
Of course such a summary is quite dry without the specifically described use case and the pictures above but maybe inspires more people to add a new category of examples or add more examples of one of the mentioned categories.
I think some kind of 2D drafting automation example and a fractal example would fit quite well in the scope of the course and offer a nice mix of practicality and inspiration.
antonsavov:
I think some kind of 2D drafting automation example and a fractal example would fit quite well in the scope of the course and offer a nice mix of practicality and inspiration.
As far as the fractal example goes, I already posted one! The fourth image from the top in my previous post shows the chaos game fractal. You can even download the file here.
Numerous 2D drafting automation scripts can also be discovered here in the forums.
For instance, here’s a pretty handy, yet simple example that I shared some time ago. It allows you to tag whatever you want with colorful text dots from Grasshopper. It’s pretty useful!
Here’s another example that I use to preview CNC cutting paths in Rhino with. You can enter the diameter of your drill bit and set tabs. Tabs are used to keep the material in place, when you don’t want to glue it to the spoilboard or don’t have a vaccum table that holds it down while milling.
toolpath_tabber_example1272×986 26.7 KB
Unfortunately, the thread where I posted it originally was deleted by its OP some time ago.
No idea why, but anybody who wants to take the script for a spin can PM me! It’s RhinoPython not GHPython though.
I keep my architectural automation scripts under wraps for now.
I guess they wouldn’t be good examples for Python beginners either, because all of them are quite complex with hundreds or even thousands lines of code and multiple, implemented algorithms. Oftentimes the results are also not very spectacular in terms of visuals. It’s quite technical stuff really.
One example that is always impressive to check out is @AndersDeleuran’s car simulation, written in GHPython: Anders Holden Deleuran on Instagram: "That one time I wrote and implemented a dynamic agent/graph-based traffic/parkering model in three days, now interfaced with #revit #dynamo through #googlesheets using #rhinoceros3d #ghpython #bigideas"
I love it and it was a huge inspiration for me back in day.
The most practical use of Python in Architecture is pyRevit, which is relevant to Rhino with Rhino Inside Revit & Python’s use in prototyping of components, which are primarily written by the same person. [Ehsan Iran-Nejad]
you mean for those architects that use revit, obviously
Yup, which is Real World, practical use cases of Python for architectural design for beginners, granted its all simulacra.
The entire pyRevit and RiR is open source and well documented as well, great for the beginner or intermediate.
no, its just “your” real world…
He is “looking for examples to give to my students at the TU Darmstadt [Germany].”
Oh, and he also tagged the post with “mac” and Revit happens to be a windows only app.
source: https://www.e-zigurat.com/blog/en/state-of-bim-adoption-europe/
Thanks, Very informative, great to see a move away from the oppression of Autodesk.
As a drafter i think Architects should stick to colored pencils
Two Python workshops by Long Nguyen, April 8-9/ April 10-12 at McNeel Europe in Barcelona
Python Scripting for Rhino/Grasshopper online workshop, February 1-3
Looking for scripting job in architecture
Rhinoscript - Built Projects in Architecture
Powered by Discourse, best viewed with JavaScript enabled
